README.md, before:

# tap_llm_course

## Table of Contents

1. [Introduction](#introduction)
2. [Materials](#materials)
3. [Exercises](#exercises)
   - [Exercises 1: Deployment LLMs](#exercises-1)
   - [Exercises 2: Prompt Engineering](#exercises-2)
   - [Exercises 3: Fine-Tuning](#exercises-3)
   - [Exercises 4: Model Merging](#exercises-4)
   - [Exercises 5: Tool Calling](#exercises-5)
   - [Exercises 6: Deployment VLMs](#exercises-6)
   - [Exercises 7: Gradio](#exercises-7)
   - [Exercises 8: LLMs in ROS 2](#exercises-8)
   - [Exercises 9: Speech in ROS 2](#exercises-9)
   - [Exercises 10: A Chatbot for ROS 2](#exercises-10)
4. [Acknowledgments](#acknowledgments)
   - [DMARCE Project](#dmarce-project)
   - [SELF-AIR Project](#self-air-project)

## Introduction

This course presents the exercises from the TAP (Tendencias en Aprendizaje Pronfundo) subject from the Master in Robotics and Artificial Intelligence course at the Universidad de León. The goal of this course is to understand and get acquainted with LLMs and different techniques such as quantization, Prompt Engineering, training through Fine-Tuning, Model Merging, and Tool Calling for AI Agents. Additionally, other concepts like VLMs, UI for AI, and AI in ROS 2 are also included. This way, these exercises are focused on downloading, deploying, and prompting LLMs and VLMs in the robotics context.

## Materials

- Nvidia Driver 12.4

- Libraries:

  - [llama.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp)
  - [llama-cpp-python](https://github.com/abetlen/llama-cpp-python)
  - [llama_ros](https://github.com/mgonzs13/llama_ros)
  - [SileroVAD](https://github.com/snakers4/silero-vad)
  - [whisper.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/whisper.cpp)
  - [whisper_ros](https://github.com/mgonzs13/whisper_ros)
  - [LangChain](https://www.langchain.com/)
  - [Unsloth](https://unsloth.ai/)
  - [Gradio](https://www.gradio.app/)
  - [ROS 2 Humble](https://docs.ros.org/en/humble/Installation/Ubuntu-Install-Debs.html)

- Models:
  - [Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct](https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct)
  - [moondream2](https://huggingface.co/vikhyatk/moondream2)
  - [MiniCPM-V-2_6](https://huggingface.co/openbmb/MiniCPM-V-2_6)

## Exercises

The exercise folders contain a collection of exercises oriented toward learning how to use Large Language Models (LLMs) and their associated techniques. These exercises reinforce the concepts covered in the lessons focused on LLMs, Fine-Tuning, Prompt Engineering, Model Merging, Tool Calling, and LLM in robotics.

### Exercises 1

These basic exercises show how to deploy a quantized LLM, specifically a [llama.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp) GGUF LLM, using [llama-cpp-python](https://github.com/abetlen/llama-cpp-python). First, the exercise focused on searching LLMs in Hugging Face and its leaderboards and arenas. Then, you have to choose a GGUF LLM and deploy it. Finally, compare the use of a chat version of an LLM with the vanilla version.

### Exercises 2

These exercises introduce Prompt Engineering by using [LangChain](https://www.langchain.com/). Therefore, [LangChain](https://www.langchain.com/) is used to deploy [llama.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp) GGUF LLMs. It also provides examples of how to use quantized LLMs to perform Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG), with Embedding models and Reranker models. Finally, a Structured Output example is included using GBNF grammars from [llama.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp).

### Exercises 3

These exercises provide examples of Fine-Tuning, PEFT (Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning), and QLoRA, using [Unsloth](https://unsloth.ai/). Specifically, there are two PEFT types employed: SFTT (Supervised Fine-tuning Trainer), used to train an LLM to generate Behaviour Trees (Dataset: [ArtemLykov/LLM_BRAIn_dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ArtemLykov/LLM_BRAIn_dataset)), and DPO (Direct Preference Optimization), used to focus an LLM on neural networks data (Dataset: [NeuralNovel/Neural-DPO](https://huggingface.co/datasets/NeuralNovel/Neural-DPO)). After Fine-Tuning the LLMs, the LoRA adapters can be merged with the base LLMs and quantize the resulting LLM or quantize the LoRA adapters.

### Exercises 4

These exercises provide examples of Model Merging to create new LLMs instead of using Fine-Tuning. There are two types of merging in these exercises: SLERP (Spherical Linear Interpolation), used to merge a Qwen model and a DeekSeek model, and Passthrough, used to merge several Qwen models. The resulting LLMs are quantized to GGUF.

### Exercises 5

This exercise presents a basic use of Tool Calling, using AI Agents. Since [llama-cpp-python](https://github.com/abetlen/llama-cpp-python) only supports calling a function, this basic example shows how an LLM can be used to create a tool call.

### Exercises 6

These exercises present a basic example of using a VLM through [llama-cpp-python](https://github.com/abetlen/llama-cpp-python). The VLM is downloaded from Hugging Face and an image is downloaded from a URL to ask questions about it.

### Exercises 7

Coming Soon

### Exercises 8

These exercises present how to download [llama.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp) GGUF LLMs and VLMs from Hugging Face and deploy and prompt them inside the ROS 2 ecosystem using [llama_ros](https://github.com/mgonzs13/llama_ros), which is [llama.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp) for ROS 2.

### Exercises 9

These exercises present how to download [whisper.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/whisper.cpp) and [SileroVAD](https://github.com/snakers4/silero-vad) models, from Hugging Face, to perform Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) in ROS 2 ecosystem using [whisper_ros](https://github.com/mgonzs13/whisper_ros), which is [whisper.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/whisper.cpp) for ROS 2.

### Exercises 10

Coming Soon

## Acknowledgments

### DMARCE Project

Decision Making in Autonomous Robots: Cybersecurity and Explainability (DMARCE).

DMARCE (EDMAR+CASCAR) Project: EDMAR PID2021-126592OB-C21 -- CASCAR PID2021-126592OB-C22 funded by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and by ERDF A way of making Europe

<p align="center">
    <img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3810011/192087445-9aa45366-1fec-41f5-a7c9-fa612901ecd9.png" width="49%" /> <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/DMARCE-PROJECT/DMARCE-PROJECT.github.io/main/logos/micin-uefeder-aei.png" width="46%" />
</p>

### SELF-AIR Project

Supporting Extensive Livestock Farming with the use of Autonomous Intelligent Robots

Grant TED2021-132356B-I00 funded by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and by the “European Union NextGenerationEU/PRTR"

<p align="center">
    <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/shepherd-robot/.github/main/profile/robotics_wolf_minimal.png" width="13.5%" /> <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/shepherd-robot/.github/main/profile/micin-financiadoUEnextgeneration-prtr-aei.png" width="60%" />
</p>

Commit message:

exercise 10 chatbot in ROS 2 added

README.md, after:

# tap_llm_course

## Table of Contents

1. [Introduction](#introduction)
2. [Materials](#materials)
3. [Exercises](#exercises)
   - [Exercises 1: Deployment LLMs](#exercises-1)
   - [Exercises 2: Prompt Engineering](#exercises-2)
   - [Exercises 3: Fine-Tuning](#exercises-3)
   - [Exercises 4: Model Merging](#exercises-4)
   - [Exercises 5: Tool Calling](#exercises-5)
   - [Exercises 6: Deployment VLMs](#exercises-6)
   - [Exercises 7: Gradio](#exercises-7)
   - [Exercises 8: LLMs in ROS 2](#exercises-8)
   - [Exercises 9: Speech in ROS 2](#exercises-9)
   - [Exercises 10: A Chatbot for ROS 2](#exercises-10)
4. [Acknowledgments](#acknowledgments)
   - [DMARCE Project](#dmarce-project)
   - [SELF-AIR Project](#self-air-project)

## Introduction

This course presents the exercises from the TAP (Tendencias en Aprendizaje Pronfundo) subject from the Master in Robotics and Artificial Intelligence course at the Universidad de León. The goal of this course is to understand and get acquainted with LLMs and different techniques such as quantization, Prompt Engineering, training through Fine-Tuning, Model Merging, and Tool Calling for AI Agents. Additionally, other concepts like VLMs, UI for AI, and AI in ROS 2 are also included. This way, these exercises are focused on downloading, deploying, and prompting LLMs and VLMs in the robotics context.

## Materials

- Nvidia Driver 12.4

- Libraries:

  - [llama.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp)
  - [llama-cpp-python](https://github.com/abetlen/llama-cpp-python)
  - [llama_ros](https://github.com/mgonzs13/llama_ros)
  - [SileroVAD](https://github.com/snakers4/silero-vad)
  - [whisper.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/whisper.cpp)
  - [whisper_ros](https://github.com/mgonzs13/whisper_ros)
  - [piper](https://github.com/rhasspy/piper)
  - [piper_ros](https://github.com/mgonzs13/piper_ros)
  - [chatbot_ros](https://github.com/mgonzs13/chatbot_ros)
  - [LangChain](https://www.langchain.com/)
  - [Unsloth](https://unsloth.ai/)
  - [Gradio](https://www.gradio.app/)
  - [ROS 2 Humble](https://docs.ros.org/en/humble/Installation/Ubuntu-Install-Debs.html)

- Models:
  - [Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct](https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct)
  - [moondream2](https://huggingface.co/vikhyatk/moondream2)
  - [MiniCPM-V-2_6](https://huggingface.co/openbmb/MiniCPM-V-2_6)

## Exercises

The exercise folders contain a collection of exercises oriented toward learning how to use Large Language Models (LLMs) and their associated techniques. These exercises reinforce the concepts covered in the lessons focused on LLMs, Fine-Tuning, Prompt Engineering, Model Merging, Tool Calling, and LLM in robotics.

### Exercises 1

These basic exercises show how to deploy a quantized LLM, specifically a [llama.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp) GGUF LLM, using [llama-cpp-python](https://github.com/abetlen/llama-cpp-python). First, the exercise focused on searching LLMs in Hugging Face and its leaderboards and arenas. Then, you have to choose a GGUF LLM and deploy it. Finally, compare the use of a chat version of an LLM with the vanilla version.

### Exercises 2

These exercises introduce Prompt Engineering by using [LangChain](https://www.langchain.com/). Therefore, [LangChain](https://www.langchain.com/) is used to deploy [llama.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp) GGUF LLMs. It also provides examples of how to use quantized LLMs to perform Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG), with Embedding models and Reranker models. Finally, a Structured Output example is included using GBNF grammars from [llama.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp).

### Exercises 3

These exercises provide examples of Fine-Tuning, PEFT (Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning), and QLoRA, using [Unsloth](https://unsloth.ai/). Specifically, there are two PEFT types employed: SFTT (Supervised Fine-tuning Trainer), used to train an LLM to generate Behaviour Trees (Dataset: [ArtemLykov/LLM_BRAIn_dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ArtemLykov/LLM_BRAIn_dataset)), and DPO (Direct Preference Optimization), used to focus an LLM on neural networks data (Dataset: [NeuralNovel/Neural-DPO](https://huggingface.co/datasets/NeuralNovel/Neural-DPO)). After Fine-Tuning the LLMs, the LoRA adapters can be merged with the base LLMs and quantize the resulting LLM or quantize the LoRA adapters.

### Exercises 4

These exercises provide examples of Model Merging to create new LLMs instead of using Fine-Tuning. There are two types of merging in these exercises: SLERP (Spherical Linear Interpolation), used to merge a Qwen model and a DeekSeek model, and Passthrough, used to merge several Qwen models. The resulting LLMs are quantized to GGUF.

### Exercises 5

This exercise presents a basic use of Tool Calling, using AI Agents. Since [llama-cpp-python](https://github.com/abetlen/llama-cpp-python) only supports calling a function, this basic example shows how an LLM can be used to create a tool call.

### Exercises 6

These exercises present a basic example of using a VLM through [llama-cpp-python](https://github.com/abetlen/llama-cpp-python). The VLM is downloaded from Hugging Face and an image is downloaded from a URL to ask questions about it.

### Exercises 7

Coming Soon

### Exercises 8

These exercises present how to download [llama.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp) GGUF LLMs and VLMs from Hugging Face and deploy and prompt them inside the ROS 2 ecosystem using [llama_ros](https://github.com/mgonzs13/llama_ros), which is [llama.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp) for ROS 2.

### Exercises 9

These exercises present how to download [whisper.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/whisper.cpp) and [SileroVAD](https://github.com/snakers4/silero-vad) models, from Hugging Face, to perform Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) in ROS 2 ecosystem using [whisper_ros](https://github.com/mgonzs13/whisper_ros), which is [whisper.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/whisper.cpp) for ROS 2.

### Exercises 10

These exercises present how to deploy a full chatbot in ROS 2 ([chatbot_ros](https://github.com/mgonzs13/chatbot_ros)). The chatbot will use [whisper_ros](https://github.com/mgonzs13/whisper_ros) to perform the Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR), [llama_ros](https://github.com/mgonzs13/llama_ros) to produce responses, and [piper_ros](https://github.com/mgonzs13/piper_ros) to speak the responses. The new component in these exercises is [piper_ros](https://github.com/mgonzs13/piper_ros) that leverage [piper](https://github.com/rhasspy/piper) to carry out the Text-to-Speech (TTS).

## Acknowledgments

### DMARCE Project

Decision Making in Autonomous Robots: Cybersecurity and Explainability (DMARCE).

DMARCE (EDMAR+CASCAR) Project: EDMAR PID2021-126592OB-C21 -- CASCAR PID2021-126592OB-C22 funded by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and by ERDF A way of making Europe

<p align="center">
    <img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3810011/192087445-9aa45366-1fec-41f5-a7c9-fa612901ecd9.png" width="49%" /> <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/DMARCE-PROJECT/DMARCE-PROJECT.github.io/main/logos/micin-uefeder-aei.png" width="46%" />
</p>

### SELF-AIR Project

Supporting Extensive Livestock Farming with the use of Autonomous Intelligent Robots

Grant TED2021-132356B-I00 funded by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and by the “European Union NextGenerationEU/PRTR"

<p align="center">
    <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/shepherd-robot/.github/main/profile/robotics_wolf_minimal.png" width="13.5%" /> <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/shepherd-robot/.github/main/profile/micin-financiadoUEnextgeneration-prtr-aei.png" width="60%" />
</p>
